README.md, before:

# Physlr: Construct a Physical Map from Linked Reads

Physlr constructs a *de novo* physical map using linked reads from 10X Genomics or stLFR. This physical map can then be used to scaffold an existing assembly to yield chromosomal level contiguity.

# Dependencies

* [ntCard](https://github.com/bcgsc/ntCard)
* [ntHits](https://github.com/bcgsc/ntHits)
* GCC 5 or newer with [OpenMP](https://www.openmp.org) and [boost](https://www.boost.org)
* Python 3.5 or newer and the following packages
    * [community](https://python-louvain.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html)
    * [networkx](https://networkx.github.io/)
    * [numpy](https://numpy.org/)
    * [scipy](https://www.scipy.org/)
    * [sklearn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/)
    * [tqdm](https://tqdm.github.io/)

Additionally, we recommend using pypy3 over regular python3 for speed.


## Optional dependencies

- [pigz](https://zlib.net/pigz/) for parallel gzip
- [zsh](https://sourceforge.net/projects/zsh/) for reporting time and memory usage


# Compiling Physlr from source

```
pip3 install --user git+https://github.com/bcgsc/physlr
git clone https://github.com/bcgsc/physlr
cd physlr/src && make install
```

To install Physlr in a specified directory:

```
pip3 install --user git+https://github.com/bcgsc/physlr
git clone https://github.com/bcgsc/physlr
cd physlr/src && make install PREFIX=/opt/physlr
```

# Running Physlr

## Generating Physlr Physical Map with stLFR reads

To construct a physical map _de novo_, you need linked reads (from 10X Genomics or MGI stLFR). 

In this example, the linked reads dataset is called `linkedreads.fq.gz`. The linked reads are from stLFR so we specify `protocol=stlfr` to use the default value for stLFR reads.

```
cd experiment # Change to working directory 
bin/physlr-make physical-map lr=linkedreads protocol=stlfr                # Constructs the physical map
```
You also have the option to provide a reference genome (with `ref`) for Physlr to evaluate the physical map. Assuming the reference is called `reference.fa`, you can run the following command for the previous example:
```
cd experiment
bin/physlr-make physical-map lr=linkedreads ref=reference protocol=stlfr  # Constructs the physical map and reference-based evaluations for it
```

If you provide a reference genome, Physlr first constructs a physical map and then maps it to the input reference. In this case, Physlr automatically outputs a `*.map-quality.tsv` file reporting assembly-like quality metrics for the physical map. In addition, Physlr visualizes the correctness and contiguity of the physical map.

You can also independently run the physical map construction and evaluation steps:
```
cd experiment
bin/physlr-make physical-map lr=linkedreads protocol=stlfr
bin/physlr-make map-quality lr=linkedreads ref=reference
```


## Scaffolding a draft assembly with Physlr Physical Map

To scaffold a draft assembly, you need linked reads from 10X Genomics or stLFR, and an existing assembly. 
In this example, the linked reads and draft assembly are called `linkedreads.fq.gz` and `draft.fa`, respectively. The linked reads are from 10X Genomics so we specify `protocol=10x` to use the default value for 10X Genomics reads.

```
cd experiment
bin/physlr-make scaffolds lr=linkedreads draft=draft protocol=10x
```
You can also include a reference genome ('reference.fa' in this example) for Physlr to calculate Quast summary metrics for the Physlr scaffolded assembly:
```
cd experiment
bin/physlr-make scaffolds lr=linkedreads ref=reference draft=draft protocol=10x
```

See the help page for further information.
`bin/physlr-make help`

# Output files

* `lr.physlr.physical-map.path`: Paths of barcodes (backbones).
* `lr.physlr.physical-map.ref.n10.paf.gz.*.pdf`: Various graphs showing the contiguity and correctness of the backbones with respect to the reference.
* `draft.physlr.fa`: Physlr scaffolded assembly using the physical map.
* `draft.physlr.quast.tsv`: Quast metrics comparing the Physlr scaffolded assembly against the reference.

# Acknowledgements

This projects uses:
* [btl_bloomfilter](https://github.com/bcgsc/btl_bloomfilter) BTL C/C++ Common bloom filters for bioinformatics projects implemented by Justin Chu
* [nthash](https://github.com/bcgsc/ntHash) rolling hash implementation by Hamid Mohamadi
* [readfq](https://github.com/lh3/readfq) Fast multi-line FASTA/Q reader API implemented by Heng Li
* [robin-map](https://github.com/Tessil/robin-map) C++ implementation of a fast hash map and hash set using robin hood hashing by Thibaut G.

Commit message:

Physlr now published (#174)
* DNA Published Physlr

* ubuntu 18.04

* azure fixes

* clang

* tests - sort different behavior

README.md, after:

[![Published in DNA](https://img.shields.io/badge/Published%20in-DNA-blue.svg)](https://www.mdpi.com/2673-8856/2/2/9)
[![Release](https://img.shields.io/github/release/bcgsc/physlr.svg)](https://github.com/bcgsc/physlr/releases)

# Physlr: Next-generation Physical Maps

Physlr constructs a *de novo* physical map using linked reads from 10X Genomics or MGI stLFR. This physical map can then be used to scaffold an existing assembly to yield chromosome-level contiguity.

# Dependencies

* [ntCard](https://github.com/bcgsc/ntCard)
* [ntHits](https://github.com/bcgsc/ntHits)
* GCC 5 or newer with [OpenMP](https://www.openmp.org) and [boost](https://www.boost.org)
* Python 3.5 or newer and the following packages
    * [community](https://python-louvain.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html)
    * [networkx](https://networkx.github.io/)
    * [numpy](https://numpy.org/)
    * [scipy](https://www.scipy.org/)
    * [sklearn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/)
    * [tqdm](https://tqdm.github.io/)

Additionally, we recommend using pypy3 over regular python3 for speed.


## Optional dependencies

- [pigz](https://zlib.net/pigz/) for parallel gzip
- [zsh](https://sourceforge.net/projects/zsh/) for reporting time and memory usage


# Compiling Physlr from source

```
pip3 install --user git+https://github.com/bcgsc/physlr
git clone https://github.com/bcgsc/physlr
cd physlr/src && make install
```

To install Physlr in a specified directory:

```
pip3 install --user git+https://github.com/bcgsc/physlr
git clone https://github.com/bcgsc/physlr
cd physlr/src && make install PREFIX=/opt/physlr
```

# Running Physlr

## Generating Physlr Physical Map with stLFR reads

To construct a physical map _de novo_, you need linked reads (from 10X Genomics or MGI stLFR). 

In this example, the linked reads dataset is called `linkedreads.fq.gz`. The linked reads are from stLFR so we specify `protocol=stlfr` to use the default value for stLFR reads.

```
cd experiment # Change to working directory 
bin/physlr-make physical-map lr=linkedreads protocol=stlfr                # Constructs the physical map
```
You also have the option to provide a reference genome (with `ref`) for Physlr to evaluate the physical map. Assuming the reference is called `reference.fa`, you can run the following command for the previous example:
```
cd experiment
bin/physlr-make physical-map lr=linkedreads ref=reference protocol=stlfr  # Constructs the physical map and reference-based evaluations for it
```

If you provide a reference genome, Physlr first constructs a physical map and then maps it to the input reference. In this case, Physlr automatically outputs a `*.map-quality.tsv` file reporting assembly-like quality metrics for the physical map. In addition, Physlr visualizes the correctness and contiguity of the physical map.

You can also independently run the physical map construction and evaluation steps:
```
cd experiment
bin/physlr-make physical-map lr=linkedreads protocol=stlfr
bin/physlr-make map-quality lr=linkedreads ref=reference
```


## Scaffolding a draft assembly with Physlr Physical Map

To scaffold a draft assembly, you need linked reads from 10X Genomics or stLFR, and an existing assembly. 
In this example, the linked reads and draft assembly are called `linkedreads.fq.gz` and `draft.fa`, respectively. The linked reads are from 10X Genomics so we specify `protocol=10x` to use the default value for 10X Genomics reads.

```
cd experiment
bin/physlr-make scaffolds lr=linkedreads draft=draft protocol=10x
```
You can also include a reference genome ('reference.fa' in this example) for Physlr to calculate Quast summary metrics for the Physlr scaffolded assembly:
```
cd experiment
bin/physlr-make scaffolds lr=linkedreads ref=reference draft=draft protocol=10x
```

See the help page for further information.
`bin/physlr-make help`

# Output files

* `lr.physlr.physical-map.path`: Paths of barcodes (backbones).
* `lr.physlr.physical-map.ref.n10.paf.gz.*.pdf`: Various graphs showing the contiguity and correctness of the backbones with respect to the reference.
* `draft.physlr.fa`: Physlr scaffolded assembly using the physical map.
* `draft.physlr.quast.tsv`: Quast metrics comparing the Physlr scaffolded assembly against the reference.

# Citing Physlr

If you use Physlr in your research, please cite:

Afshinfard A, Jackman SD, Wong J, Coombe L, Chu J, Nikolic V, Dilek G, Malkoç Y, Warren RL, Birol I. Physlr: Next-Generation Physical Maps. DNA. 2022 Jun 10;2(2):116-30. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/dna2020009

[![link](https://img.shields.io/badge/Physlr-manuscript-brightgreen)](https://doi.org/10.3390/dna2020009)

# Acknowledgements

This projects uses:
* [btl_bloomfilter](https://github.com/bcgsc/btl_bloomfilter) BTL C/C++ Common bloom filters for bioinformatics projects implemented by Justin Chu
* [nthash](https://github.com/bcgsc/ntHash) rolling hash implementation by Hamid Mohamadi
* [readfq](https://github.com/lh3/readfq) Fast multi-line FASTA/Q reader API implemented by Heng Li
* [robin-map](https://github.com/Tessil/robin-map) C++ implementation of a fast hash map and hash set using robin hood hashing by Thibaut G.
